You bother and threaten me.
Boy, you know, that's quite a comment.
That is.
I mean, that is a pearl for Freudians to pick up.
And I'm not sure that anybody would have written that into a letter in post-Freudian time.
Oh, I'd be amazed.
You know what I mean?
Because Freudianism brought a kind of self-consciousness into our diction of sex.
And no man can ever write a sentence like that again without, I mean, no cultivated man, without saying, oh my God, what am I saying?
It's like reading some of the things that Walt Whitman wrote, you know?
Yeah.
It's the same kind of thing.
I didn't realize how many...
People of note, the literati, burned their letters during that time.
I guess there was this great fear of being scandalized.
I think it began much more in the 1870s, and it was triggered by a couple of concrete social factors.
One, the Victorian puritanism of Great Britain sort of seeped into France.
It was a very sort of anglo-philic time.
People left everything British in the 1860s and 1870s.
They had not in the earlier part of the century.
And so it was sort of taking on the British then Victorian Puritanism and saying, this cannot be left.
I mean, this is bad for my image.
Let's forge our image as it should be.
And I think that's a very concrete historical cause for the burning of letters in France at that particular time.
Now, what are you working on now, might I ask?
I am starting a biography, sort of a compound biography, of the Marquise de Sade.
Really?
And her mother as a study, I mean, as a study in the
the power of French women in the Ancien Régime.
I love that book that Forrest Rose published a couple months ago.
Oh, on the biography.
Exactly, yeah, really.
I reviewed it in the New Yorker.
He did?
Yeah, September 6th issue.
Did you like it?
I loved it.
I found a few flaws that he didn't explain side relations with his mother enough, which again is a kind of
It's quite a good book, I thought.
I thought it was a wonderful book.
I thought it was very, very well done.
And this is really balanced biography of science.
Well, I'll certainly look forward to it.
Are you just beginning work on this now?
Yes, I've written up my proposals.
I mean, the 25-page proposals, I've already done quite a bit of background.
She left a lot of letters to him, and that's another story about women's power and powerlessness.
Which is a recurring theme in your concern.
I think that the whole dialectic of power and powerlessness is a recurring theme in my work, yeah.
I think I have plenty of material here, and I won't take up any more of your time.
And I thank you very much for taking the time to talk to me.
Be very kind, and I will look forward to... And I'll have something pretty quickly.
All right.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Bye-bye.
And I'm on now.
I'm talking to Peter Benchley.
This is the 20th anniversary of JAWS, is that correct?
Yes.
JAWS came out in the spring of 1974.
Uh-huh.
Is this just coincidental that we're doing a book with the title White Shark, or is it an observance for you of some sort of anniversary?
No, it's partly coincidental, but I knew that I wanted to call it that because you haven't had an opportunity to read the book, which I appreciate, but I'm not dealing with animals in this.
Instead, it is a different kind of villain.
I thought that because of the nature of the villain, it would have had a code name under the circumstances, and I thought what better code name than White Shark, so I didn't have the arrogance to presume a certain resonance for the name.
I did.
I started it, and I really resisted the temptation to go rushing ahead to see what happens, but clearly we have a Nazi here on a submarine, and we're just being attacked by a plane, so I'm just kind of getting into it.
So tell me, is this a Peter Benchley thriller?
Oh, yes, but the difference is that I had known of a number of things that I wanted to say and plot the story that I wanted to tell, and the story needed a villain as a motor, and I could not find, nor did I find it appropriate to speak, an animal who was a villain.
I can't use animals as villains for several reasons.
and the research has changed on sharks in the past 20 years so that what I did as a modest ambition in 1974 would be inapplicable today because we know a great deal more about white sharks than they did back then.
Anyway, I've used killer whales, I'm sorry, not killer whales, giant squid, and I don't believe that one can, in a bona fide way, turn an animal into a villain, especially not an ecological villain.
The villain of the piece
It has to be a man because man is the spoiler of the seas.
And there was a wonderful statistic I ran into the other day that for every shark attack on a human being, four and a half million sharks are killed by human beings.
Do you feel some personal responsibility for that?
Do you feel some personal responsibility for that in some way?
No, no, no, no.
The people who are killing sharks have nothing to do with...
or any sort of reaction to it.
What's killing the sharks is reckless, irresponsible, and ignorant greed, basically.
It is two new kinds of fishing, the longlines and the gillnets.
And then a third kind, which is the Asians who want to have shark fins, and they are going all over the world catching sharks and de-finning them and throwing the still-living carcasses back into the ocean.
So the incidence of macho lunacy in people who are attacking sharks in a Jaws frenzy is utterly insignificant and has certainly passed in the past few years.
It doesn't exist anymore.
White sharks, in particular, are protected.
Anyway, to get back to the original question, I got into some research a scientist had done at Duke in the 1960s about creating an amphibious human being, and he did it
succeeded up to a point, and he thought this was going to be the future of diving.
And other people agreed with him, my God, if you could make an amphibious human being think of what a wonderful thing it would be for people to be able to go to a thousand feet without worrying about the bend or anything else.
Jeez.
So this is what we've got here.
Is this it?
You don't have to worry about... In fact, they did that.
And I thought, what an interesting idea.
Suppose it had been done earlier in Germany, sort of the way they were doing lunatic experiments, Mengele and others,
for no good purpose but pure science in their eyes and suppose they had effectively created out of a psychopath they had created an amphibious human being and they were trying to take it to South America to continue work on it and the submarine got sunk and then cut to 50 years later the thing is finally recovered by accident by the National Geographic and is on its way home or on its way back
Therefore, it becomes the predatory.
Wow.
Now, there's no tongue-in-cheek in this for you, is there?
I mean, this is not... No, there certainly isn't in the telling of the story.
There's tongue-in-cheek to a certain extent in the title, of course, and there are...
But this is a serious thriller.
I did read someplace where when you were doing the last one on the squid, you were torn between making a kind of a comic thriller and they told you, look, you can't do this.
Is that an accurate reflection of what happened with the book on the...
on the squid yes i i did beef i thought i would do it as a comedy first and uh i did 200 pages of a of a comic squid novel and um turned it into my editor of random house and said i think this is brilliant she said well i don't know what it is uh it's you can't really get away with doing a a comic thriller because if you're asking people on the one hand to be afraid and on the other to laugh at it those are conflicting emotions so either do a comedy or do a thriller
But if you have a giant squid, it's my feeling, said she, that a squid lends itself enormously to the thriller conflict.
So what we have here is a mutant, in other words.
Is this right?
Some kind of a mutant.
Remember the old commercials, it's not nice to whatever it is, fool Mother Nature?
That's what this is about, essentially, is what's happening not in genetic research.
I don't propose to know anything about that.
But when we start screwing around with the oceans from any point of view, of dumping things in them, of overfishing them, of fooling with the food chain in any way at all, there are effects that are much more far-reaching than anybody can imagine.
It's like the fellow who released
So in this case, you have a man who was fooling around with a divine creation and deciding he's going to make something new out of it, and it's a poor idea.
There's a book I just read by James Hall.
I don't know if you're familiar with him.
He writes down in Florida, and the whole premise there is they have this fish, the red tilapia, which I guess is somebody brought the thing over, and it's going wild.
It's introducing the species, I guess, down in Florida.
Of course, then he uses this as a premise in the book, you know.
Yeah, well, apparently there's a muscle that's gotten loose up in the Great Lakes, right?
And that came over attached to some ship's bottoms, and now that's loose and is damaging everything up there.
So do you have a sense of an ecological message here in your novels, or is it fundamentally entertainment in your view?
Well, to me, to do something preachy is a waste of time.
If you can get any sort of message through an entertaining story, you're in better shape.
It gives a certain amount of substance to the story, and I have no interest particularly in telling stories for the sake of telling stories.
In Beasts, the squid novel, there was a sense of disrupting the entire food chain in the oceans by killing sperm whales, and it caused a vast increase in the number of giant squid.
That was the premise of this.
Again, you can't, with impunity, mess with nature
expect everything to go along as it did.
And there was a lot of stuff in that book about Bermuda and what happened with the destruction, in fact, with the destruction of the entire food chain around Bermuda and how every little event causes ripples
When did you start thinking about this particular book?
I mean, where did the idea for this one come from?
I know there's always been something that's pushed you towards a... Well, I thought of it a couple of years ago.
I started thinking about, first of all, since I live in Connecticut in the summertime in Nantucket, and I see the destruction of the blue fishing industry and the glumination of the bats and the swordfish and the tunafish,
And I thought, again, this isn't something worth looking at.
And I made a false start on it again of 200 or 300 pages because I fell in love with the research about the Germans.
And I did an enormous amount of reading about what life was like on a U-boat during World War II.
And my false start consisted of a very long episode, probably 150 pages about the crossing of the Atlantic on the U-boat.
And I suddenly realized, by God, you're
50 years ago, who cares?
And as you'll see in this book, the German thing probably takes 15 or 20 pages, and that's all.
Well, I just, like I said, the FedEx arrived with the thing about 1.30, you know, and they're already under attack by the airplane, so I figure that takes care of it for the U-boat.
Right, and that's probably on page 25.
Yeah, that's about it.
And, you know, and I kind of went in really knowing.
By the way, I'm doing this for a number of newspapers, and the reason for the rush on this is that I got a summer gig here with Hamptons Magazine on Long Island, and they're quite eager to start the season on Memorial Day with a feature on Peter Benchley.
That's why I really asked to get this thing put together rather quickly.
Well, no, it's good for me also.
I've got to go to the Vineyard on...
Monday morning for a week with the Discovery Channel, so it worked out well.
Okay.
Now, you've done since Jaws or prior to Jaws, or I don't know the history of this, but coincidental with your interest that either began with that book?
I mean, you really have been quite involved in the ocean, haven't you?
No, but I grew up off Nantucket during the summer, so I've always been involved with the ocean.
After Jaws, thank heavens, ABC came to me and said that I want to go down to South Australia and get in the water with white sharks, which I did.
And then I developed kind of an informal franchise for 10 or 15 years for ABC of being the person who was willing to go do American sportsman shows by diving with the anthropophagites, the things that want to eat you.
So I've done probably over time 20...
or so documentaries about the ocean and have done a bunch of books about it and spend as much time as I possibly can in, on, around, and under it.
Chris, it's kind of interesting that the film Jaws was a Spielberg thing, a movie, and then the dinosaurs came along with Crichton's book.
Are you hopeful that you could get something like that out of this?
No, no.
Spielberg has said, I think, kind of interestingly, he was asked about Jurassic Park, and he said it was my attempt to make a good sequel to Jaws.
Is that right?
Yeah.
How come you didn't think of the dinosaurs?
That was almost the next logical step, isn't it?
Michael Crichton, that was a brilliant idea.
It was a brilliant book.
Because the premise is absolutely valid.
It really is.
I don't know whether it's valid, but it sure was convincing.
And he writes with a great deal of scientific authority.
And whether it's true or not, I believe it.
Yeah, but I mean, there was a piece in the New York Times.
They were doing this DNA research from Amber, you know.
And that was pretty interesting.
Let me see, you set this off the Connecticut coast, I guess, right?
Yeah.
You've kind of moved it a little bit.
And, of course, it's not tied in.
I'm trying to remember back to Jaws.
Did that thing kick off at the beginning of the summer?
Was that Memorial Day weekend when Jaws?
I really don't remember when it was.
It was about that time, sir.
But, I mean, the story itself, I think they were worried about the summer starting, right?
In the book, it was July 4th.
It was 4th of July coming up.
Okay, I'm just trying to.
The beach is open for the 4th of July.
Now, I remember reading something about you almost wrote Jaws on a dare.
I mean, somebody gave you a $1,000 advance, and the book was either going to be about pirates or sharks.
No, that's not true.
When I worked for Newsweek, periodically we would go to lunch with editors, all of us writers at Newsweek, because it was a free lunch for us, and the editors thought that once in a while they might get a book out of a writer for a magazine.
The two ideas that I had played with over the years were one doing something on pirates and one doing something on sharks.
I had seen an article in the New York Daily News in 1964 about a guy who caught a 4,500-pound white shark off Long Island.
And the editors were always perfectly encouraging and said, gee, either one sounds great, you know, why don't you do something?
And then I never did it.
Finally...
Tom Congdon of Doubleday knew the way to an impecunious writer's heart was to offer money.
So he said, I'll tell you what, I like the shark idea.
I'll give you $1,000 for four chapters.
And if you do the four chapters, we'll write a contract.
So after a period of months, I hadn't done the four chapters.
My agent said, you better give the man his $1,000 back.
And I didn't have it.
So that was the incentive I needed.
And I sat down and wrote the first four chapters.
That's amazing.
Did the response to that, I mean, does it still boggle you?
I mean, did you expect the kind of mega hit that emerged out of that?
Oh, no.
I knew for a fact that the book couldn't be successful.
For one thing, it was a first novel and nobody reads first novels.
And two, it was a first novel about a fish.
And three, I knew they couldn't make a movie out of it because you couldn't catch and train a great white shark.
Yeah, that's something, huh?
And would you say you wrote this, you really didn't write this on a lark, of course, because you had $1,000 and you didn't have the $1,000 to give back, but were you, I mean, did you really think that this was going to be your, we're talking about in your early 30s, I guess, at that point.
and still trying to figure out where you're going.
I mean, was being a professional writer a fiction writer in your mindset here?
Oh, I knew that in an ideal world that's what I would have liked to have done, yes, but at the time I had, as I said, no ambitions for the book at all.
I just knew that I was freelancing for magazines and not making any money, and I had two young children and $600 in the bank, and I had composed a letter to the National Geographic begging for a
I had no idea what it was going to become, nor did I have any idea that it would give me the freedom that it did.
Do you think that if it hadn't been as successful as it was, that you would have had maybe more freedom, say, to write and any number of different, to pursue other avenues as a fiction writer, or have you pretty much gone the way you think you wanted to go since Jaws?
Well, that's always hard to determine as to whether, what would have happened if
The success of Jaws gave me the opportunity, because of the television involvement later on, to go do more and more and more about the oceans, which I loved and would have killed to have the opportunity to do.
And so once I had that opportunity, stories led from my experiences, and every book that I've done has had some basis in my own life.
Even the comedy that I did about the White House was based on
my time in the White House 18 years before that.
So although I have developed something of an ocean franchise, if you will, that's, what can I say, that that's not, it's not something I would have avoided if Jaws had not been successful, but because it was successful, I had the opportunity to spend a lot of time learning more and more about it.
If it hadn't been successful in what I had done, I probably would have still been trying to get a job at The Geographic, and that's where that would have led.
How many novels now in 20 years?
It must be, what, 10?
I think this is the ninth.
Is it ninth?
The ninth?
That's amazing.
And what do you see next?
Are you working?
In between those novels, unlike somebody like Stephen King who turns them out one and two and three a year, I'm not that prolific and I spend a lot of time
diving and doing whatever television shows I can.
So in between the novels, I tend to do screenplays that more often than not don't get bought or made, and television shows, when I can get myself wired into them, that take me around the world learning more about the oceans.
So at the moment, I'm doing a project for the Smithsonian and Times Mirror about the oceans that
So who knows what will happen next?
I never have any idea.
Okay.
Excuse me for being a little vague here.
Again, we did just put this thing together in a very short amount of time.
Your father certainly, he critiqued, or he certainly read Jaws, and he enjoyed it, I guess.
I guess I'm trying to get something here on the Benchley tradition.
Your grandfather was from Worcester, by the way, isn't that right?
Yes.
Did you know there's a Benchley Square in Worcester?
I didn't know that.
I knew there were still some Benchleys up in that neighborhood.
I don't know how famous it is, but I think that there is actually a little marker there, Benchley Square.
Somebody mentioned that to me the other day.
My whole family comes from that whole area.
I think my father was born in Newton.
Right.
And grandfather in Worcester.
We spend all of our summers in Nantucket, so our connection goes back generations.
I'm wondering, you're leaving for the vineyard, is that right?
Yeah, Monday.
Are you going to be around maybe during, could I reach you at some point?
You know, I really feel kind of silly asking you questions about a book that I haven't read yet.
Would it be at all possible to reach you in a couple, two, three days at some point, do you think?
Or are you going to be kind of out of it?
My problem is I don't know what I'm going to be doing up there.
I know where I'll be, which is in a hotel called the Harborview.
Uh-huh.
which I know that's over in Edyartown.
I'd be happy to answer whatever questions you have.
Okay, I think what I want to do is, I mean, I think I'm pretty certain that I know what I want to write here.
And I think that you have given me some good quotes, and I do have some other material, but you never know.
You know, there might be another question or two.